ECH: Move nodes off allocator doc updated (#1619)
elastic/docs-content: troubleshoot/monitoring/node-moves-outages.md

---

> navigation_title: Node moves and HW failures

Author: I'd like a suggestion for the nav title, I'm thinking of `Node moves and system maintenance` better than HW failures.
WDYT?

cc: @kunisen , @shainaraskas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
navigation_title: Node moves and Hardware failures
```

> navigation_title: Node moves and Hardware failures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
navigation_title: Node moves and system maintenance
```

* A host where the Cloud Service Provider (CSP), like AWS, GCP, or Azure, has reported upcoming hardware deprecation or identified issues requiring remediation.
* Abrupt host termination by the CSP due to underlying infrastructure problems.
* Mandatory host operating system (OS) patching or upgrades for security or compliance reasons.
* Other scheduled maintenance announced on the [Elastic status page](https://status.elastic.co/).

Depending on the cause of the node movement, the behavior and expectations differ.

* During planned operations, such as hardware upgrades or host patches, the system attempts to gracefully move the node to another host before shutting down the original one. This process allows shard relocation to complete ahead of time, minimizing any potential disruption.

* In contrast, if a node’s host experiences an unexpected outage, the system automatically vacates the node and displays a related `Don't attempt to gracefully move shards` message on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md), skipping the check to ensure the node’s shards have been moved before shutdown.

> ## Behavior during system maintenance [ec-node-behavior-maintenance]

Reviewer: I rewrote the whole passage based on your suggestion. Mark this as resolved.

The following sections describe how your deployment behaves during maintenance, how to reduce risks such as data loss, and how to stay informed. If you still have questions or concerns about system maintenance activities after reviewing this content, please reach out to [Elastic support](/troubleshoot/index.md#contact-us) for help.

### Service availability during node vacate

> Unless overridden or unable, the system will automatically recover the vacated node’s data automatically from replicas or snapshots. If your cluster has [high availability (HA)](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha) configured, all search and indexing requests should continue to work within the reduced capacity as the node is replaced.

Reviewer 2: can we clarify or reword "within the reduced capacity"? maybe "using the remaining nodes" or something?

Reviewer: It's a wrong description. Original KB was clear:
- Correct: all search and indexing requests should work within the reduced capacity **until** the node is replaced
- Wrong: all search and indexing requests should work within the reduced capacity _as_ the node is replaced

I updated the text and used the correct wording. 
It's talking about node replacement, and "until" explains the "reduced capacity" during the maintenance in a more logically clear way.

Overall, having replicas and multiple availability zones helps minimize service interruption.

### Data loss risk for non-HA deployments

> The system maintenance process always attempts to recover the vacated node's data from replicas or snapshots. However, if the deployment is not configured with HA, including replica shards, the maintenance process may not be able to recover the data from the vacated node.

Reviewer 2: we aren't under great space constraints so i'd spell it out here

```suggestion
The system maintenance process always attempts to recover the vacated node's data from replicas or snapshots. However, if the deployment is not configured with high availability, including replica shards, the maintenance process may not be able to recover the data from the vacated node.
```

To minimize this risk, ensure your deployment follows the [high availability best practices](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha), which recommend:

> - Using at least two availability zones for production systems (three for mission-critical systems).
> - Configuring one or more replicas for each index (except for searchable snapshot indexes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Using at least two availability zones for production systems, and three for mission-critical systems.
- Configuring one or more replicas for each index, except for searchable snapshot indices.
```

As long as these recommendations are followed, system maintenance processes should not impact the availability of the data in the deployment.

### Data loss risk without replica shards

Configuring multiple availability zones helps your deployment remain available for indexing and search requests if one zone becomes unavailable. However, this alone does not guarantee data availability. To ensure that your data remains accessible, indices must be configured with [replica shards](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards.md).

If an index has no replica shards and its primary shard is located on a node that must be vacated, data loss may occur if the system is unable to move the node gracefully during the maintenance activity.

> ### Performance considerations during system maintenance

Reviewer 2: suggest pulling this up to an h2 because notifications are not behavior

The performance impact of system maintenance depends on how well the deployment is sized. Well-provisioned clusters with sufficient buffer capacity typically remain unaffected, while deployments already operating near their limits may experience slowdowns, or even intermittent request failures, during node vacating.

> High availability assumes not just redundancy in data and zones, but also the ability to absorb the loss or restart of a node without service disruption. As mentioned in [](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha):

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe get rid of this "as mentioned" structure, and say "to learn more, [link]". we can't guarantee that the quoted text will be identical forever

::::{admonition} Availability zones and performance
Increasing the number of zones should not be used to add more resources. The concept of zones is meant for High Availability (2 zones) and Fault Tolerance (3 zones), but neither will work if the cluster relies on the resources from those zones to be operational.

The recommendation is to **scale up the resources within a single zone until the cluster can take the full load (add some buffer to be prepared for a peak of requests)**, then scale out by adding additional zones depending on your requirements: 2 zones for High Availability, 3 zones for Fault Tolerance.

> ::::

Reviewer 2: this note breaks up the flow of what you're trying to highlight. i'd put the admonition below the core paragraph

Reviewer: thanks!

> ::::

Reviewer 2: be careful about repeating info that's elsewhere - this concept is something we should probably use a snippet for 

you should also avoid bolding and brackets generally. "high availability" and "fault tolerance" also do not need Title Case.

"the recommendation is" is not an ideal sentence struture. Try "You should [blank]"

Reviewer 2: the bolding is a relic of a previous time, and people keep adding it back into docs. We don't have capacity to do bulk style overhauls at all (we're focusing on accuracy right now, and those changes are low value/high effot) so I try to fix it when I see it. I see your point, but this is why I call out this kind of styling in the context of a review. just for future reference.

At a minimum, you should size your deployment to tolerate the temporary loss of one node in order to avoid single points of failure and ensure proper HA. For critical systems, ensure that the deployment can continue operating even in the event of losing an entire availability zone.

### Set up email alerts for node changes [email]

To receive an email when nodes are added or removed from your deployment:

1. Enable [Stack monitoring](/deploy-manage/monitor/stack-monitoring/ece-ech-stack-monitoring.md#enable-logging-and-monitoring-steps) (logs and metrics) on your deployment. Only metrics collection is required for these notifications to work.

> In the deployment used as the destination of Stack monitoring:

Reviewer 2: this needs to be integrated into the list of steps. this should be step 2 and steps 2-4 should be made children

2. Create [Stack monitoring default rules](/deploy-manage/monitor/monitoring-data/configure-stack-monitoring-alerts.md#_create_default_rules).

> 3. (Optional) Configure an email [connector](/deploy-manage/manage-connectors.md). If you prefer, use the pre-configured `Elastic-CLoud-SMTP`.

Reviewer 2: I'd probably link here instead

```suggestion
3. (Optional) Configure an email [connector](kibana://connectors-kibana/email-action-type.md). If you prefer, use the preconfigured `Elastic-Cloud-SMTP` email connector.
```

> 4. Edit the rule  **Cluster alerting** → **{{es}} nodes changed** and select the email connector.

Reviewer 2: is this only true if you set up the email connector? or is the previous step meant to be "if you haven't already"

```suggestion
4. Edit the rule  **Cluster alerting** > **{{es}} nodes changed** and select the email connector.
```

::::{note}

> If you have only one master node in your cluster, during the master node vacate no notification will be sent. Kibana needs to communicate with the master node in order to send a notification. One way to avoid this is by shipping your deployment metrics to a dedicated monitoring cluster when you enable logging and monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have only one master node in your cluster, no notification will be sent during the master node vacate. {{kib}} needs to communicate with the master node in order to send a notification. One way to avoid this is by shipping your deployment metrics to a dedicated monitoring cluster when you enable logging and monitoring.
```

Reviewer 2: does this note also depend on having a self-monitoring setup?

  - id: cloud-hosted
---

# Understanding node moves and system maintenance [maintenance]

To ensure that your deployment nodes are located on healthy hosts, Elastic vacates nodes to perform essential system maintenance or to remove a host with hardware issues from service. These tasks cannot be skipped or delayed.

> All major scheduled maintenance and incidents can be found on the Elastic [status page](https://status.elastic.co/). You can subscribe to that page to be notified about planned maintenance or actions that have been taken to respond to incidents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can subscribe to the [status page](https://status.elastic.co/) to be notified about planned maintenance or actions that have been taken to respond to incidents.
```

If events on your deployment don’t correlate to any items listed on the status page, the events are due to minor essential maintenance performed on only a subset of {{ech}} deployments.

> This document explains the message that appears on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md) in {{ech}} deployments during system maintenance, helping you understand its meaning, implications, and what to expect:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When {{ech}} undergoes system maintenance, the following message appears on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md):
```

```sh
Move nodes off of allocator [allocator_id] due to essential system maintenance.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```

This page explains the causes and impact of node moves and system maintenance, and how to mitigate any possible risks to your deployment.
````

::::{note}

> You can also [configure email notifications](#email) to be alerted when this situation occurs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can also [configure email notifications](#configure-email-notification) to be alerted when this situation occurs.
```

::::

> ## Possible causes [cause]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Possible causes [possible-cause]
```
Should we be a bit more specific?

> * A host where the Cloud Service Provider (CSP), like AWS, GCP, or Azure, has notified us in advance about hardware issues.

Reviewer 5: Do we get an advance notice about hw issues? Even if we do, I think the term "advance" might set wrong expectations here, i.e. even with advance notice we won't be able to delay this operation.

Reviewer 6: > about hardware issues

➕ this wording needs to be careful if included. Something like the cloud host may notify us of "pending hardware deprecation/maintenance that they'll be performing soon".

Author: Updated, let me know your thoughts @jakommo and @stefnestor. I've used Stef's suggestion.
Great feedback about the `advance` wording.

Reviewer: Let's discuss this internally.
See elastic/support-tech-lead#1576 (comment) - [2] part

* A host where the Cloud Service Provider (CSP), like AWS, GCP, or Azure, has reported upcoming hardware deprecation or identified issues requiring remediation.
* Abrupt host termination by the CSP due to underlying infrastructure problems.
* Mandatory host operating system (OS) patching or upgrades for security or compliance reasons.
* Other scheduled maintenance announced on the [Elastic status page](https://status.elastic.co/).

> ## Behavior difference [difference]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Behavior difference [behavior-difference]
```

> * In contrast, if a node’s host experiences an unexpected outage, the system automatically vacates the node and displays a related `Don't attempt to gracefully move shards` message on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md). Since the node is unavailable, the system skips checks that ensure the node’s shards have been moved before shutting down the node.

Author: That `since` needs to be replaced also by `because`! 🤦‍♂️  Making note of it.

* During planned operations, such as hardware upgrades or host patches, the system attempts to gracefully move the node to another host before shutting down the original one. This process allows shard relocation to complete ahead of time, minimizing any potential disruption.

> * In contrast, if a node’s host experiences an unexpected outage, the system automatically vacates the node and displays a related `Don't attempt to gracefully move shards` message on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md), skipping the check to ensure the node’s shards have been moved before shutdown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If a node’s host experiences an unexpected outage, the system automatically vacates the node and displays a related `Don't attempt to gracefully move shards` message on the [activity page](../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/keep-track-of-deployment-activity.md), skipping the check to ensure the node’s shards have been moved before shutdown.
```

> Unless overridden or unable, the system will automatically recover the vacated node’s data automatically from replicas or snapshots. If your cluster has [high availability (HA)](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud/current/ec-planning.html#ec-ha) configured, all search and indexing requests should continue to work within the reduced capacity until the node is replaced.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Unless overridden or unable, the system will automatically recover the vacated node’s data automatically from replicas or snapshots. If your cluster has [high availability (HA)](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud/current/ec-planning.html#ec-ha) configured, all search and indexing requests should continue to work within the reduced capacity as the node is replaced.
```

Nit pick, sorry, but technically the search cache has to build up even after the node comes up.

## Impact and mitigation [impact-mitigation]

> The following sections describe how your deployment behaves during maintenance, how to reduce risks of data loss, and how to stay informed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following sections describe how your deployment behaves during maintenance, and how to reduce risks of data loss.
```

> The following sections describe the expectations and considerations during system maintenance, such as how your deployment behaves during maintenance, how to reduce risks such as data loss, and how to stay informed. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following sections describe how your deployment behaves during maintenance, how to reduce risks of data loss, and how to stay informed. 
```

The system maintenance process always attempts to recover the vacated node's data from replicas or snapshots. However, if the deployment is not configured with HA, including replica shards, the maintenance process may not be able to recover the data from the vacated node.

> To minimize this risk, ensure your deployment follows the [high availability best practices](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha), which recommend:

Reviewer 5: same as https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/1619/files#r2129040209, the anchor does not exist anymore

Reviewer: Yes, this one is I added the anchor so it's good. Thanks for checking!

Overall, having replicas and multiple availability zones helps minimize service interruption.

### Data resiliency 

> The system maintenance process always attempts to recover the vacated node's data from replicas or snapshots. However, if the deployment is not configured with high availability, the maintenance process may not be able to recover the data from the vacated node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The system maintenance process always attempts to recover the vacated node's data from replicas or snapshots. However, if the deployment is not configured with high availability, the maintenance process might not be able to recover the data from the vacated node.
```

> Configuring multiple availability zones helps your deployment remain available for indexing and search requests if one zone becomes unavailable. However, this alone does not guarantee data availability. If an index has no replica shards and its primary shard is located on a node that must be vacated, data loss may occur if the system is unable to move the node gracefully during the maintenance activity. To ensure that your data remains accessible, indices must be configured with [replica shards](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuring multiple availability zones helps your deployment remain available for indexing and search requests if one zone becomes unavailable. However, this alone does not guarantee data availability. If an index has no replica shards and its primary shard is located on a node that must be vacated, data loss might occur if the system is unable to move the node gracefully during the maintenance activity.
```

> Therefore, to minimize this risk, ensure your deployment follows the [high availability best practices](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To minimize this risk and keep your data accessible, ensure that your deployment follows [high availability best practices](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha):
```

- Use at least two availability zones for production systems, and three for mission-critical systems.

> - Configure one or more replicas for each index, except for searchable snapshot indices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Configure one or more [replica shards](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards.md) for each index, except for searchable snapshot indices.
```

> - Using at least two availability zones for production systems, and three for mission-critical systems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use at least two availability zones for production systems, and three for mission-critical systems.
```

As long as these recommendations are followed, system maintenance processes should not impact the availability of the data in the deployment.

### Performance stability

> The performance impact of system maintenance depends on how well the deployment is sized. Well-provisioned deployments with sufficient buffer capacity typically remain unaffected, while deployments already operating near their limits may experience slowdowns, or even intermittent request failures, during node vacating.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The performance impact of system maintenance depends on how well the deployment is sized. Well-provisioned deployments with sufficient buffer capacity typically remain unaffected, while deployments already operating near their limits might experience slowdowns, or even intermittent request failures, during node vacating.
```

> High availability assumes not just redundancy in data and zones, but also the ability to absorb the loss or restart of a node without service disruption. To learn more, check the [plan for production](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
High availability assumes not just redundancy in data and zones, but also the ability to absorb the loss or restart of a node without service disruption. To learn more, refer to [Plan for production](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha).
```

> High availability assumes not just redundancy in data and zones, but also the ability to absorb the loss or restart of a node without service disruption. To learn more, review [plan for production](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
High availability assumes not just redundancy in data and zones, but also the ability to absorb the loss or restart of a node without service disruption. To learn more, check the [plan for production](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/elastic-cloud-hosted-planning.md#ec-ha).
```

At a minimum, you should size your deployment to tolerate the temporary loss of one node in order to avoid single points of failure and ensure proper HA. For critical systems, ensure that the deployment can continue operating even in the event of losing an entire availability zone.

> ::::{admonition} Availability zones and sizing recommendations
> Increasing the number of zones should not be used to add more resources. The concept of zones is meant for high availability (2 zones) and fault tolerance (3 zones), but neither will work if the cluster relies on the resources from those zones to be operational.
> 
> You should to scale up the resources within a single zone until the cluster can take the full load (add some buffer to be prepared for a peak of requests), then scale out by adding additional zones depending on your requirements: 2 zones for high availability, 3 zones for fault tolerance.
> ::::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::::{admonition} Availability zones and sizing recommendations
Increasing the number of zones should not be used to add more resources. The concept of zones is meant for high availability (two zones) and fault tolerance (three zones), but neither will work if the cluster relies on the resources from those zones to be operational.

You should to scale up the resources within a single zone until the cluster can take the full load, adding some buffer to be prepared for a peak of requests. You should then scale out by adding additional zones depending on your requirements: two zones for high availability, three zones for fault tolerance.
::::
```

> ## Configure email notifications [email]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Configure email notifications [configure-email-notification]
```

> You can configure email alerts for system maintenance by following the steps outlined below: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure email alerts for system maintenance by following these steps: 
```

1. Enable [Stack monitoring](/deploy-manage/monitor/stack-monitoring/ece-ech-stack-monitoring.md#enable-logging-and-monitoring-steps) (logs and metrics) on your deployment. Only metrics collection is required for these notifications to work.

2. In the deployment used as the destination of Stack monitoring:

  * Create [Stack monitoring default rules](/deploy-manage/monitor/monitoring-data/configure-stack-monitoring-alerts.md#_create_default_rules).

  * (Optional) Configure an email [connector](kibana://reference/connectors-kibana/email-action-type.md). If you prefer, use the preconfigured `Elastic-Cloud-SMTP` email connector.

  * Edit the rule  **Cluster alerting** > **{{es}} nodes changed** and select the email connector.

::::{note}

> If you have only one master node in your cluster, no notification will be sent during the master node vacate. {{kib}} needs to communicate with the master node in order to send a notification. One way to avoid this is by shipping your deployment metrics to a dedicated monitoring cluster when you enable logging and monitoring.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have only one master node in your cluster, no notification will be sent during the master node vacate. {{kib}} needs to communicate with the master node in order to send a notification. You can avoid this by shipping your deployment metrics to a dedicated monitoring cluster when you enable logging and monitoring.
```
